This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain. For more
information on how to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.blogsum.com. Recording by Karen LeBenz.
Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus, by Mary Shelley. Chapter 11.
It is with considerable difficulty that I remember the original error of my being. All the events
of that period appear confused and indistinct. A strange multiplicity of sensations sees me,
and I saw, felt, heard, and smelled at the same time. And it was, indeed, a long time before I
learned to distinguish between the operations of my various senses. By degrees I remember a
shut my eyes. Darkness then came over me, and troubled me. But hardly had I felt this when,
by opening my eyes, as I now suppose, the light poured in upon me again. I walked,
and I believed, descended, but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations.
Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or sight. But I now
found that I could wander on at liberty with no obstacles, which I could not surmount or avoid.
The light became more and more oppressive to me, and the heat wearing me as I walked,
I sought a place where I could receive shade. This was the forest near Ingolstadt. And here
I lay by the side of a brook, resting from my fatigue until I felt tormented by hunger and
thirst. This roused me from my nearly dormant state, and I ate some berries which I had found
hanging on the trees or lying on the ground. I slacked my thirst at the brook, and then lying
down was overcome by sleep. It was dark when I awoke. I felt cold also, and half frightened,
as it were instinctively, finding myself so desolate. Before I had quitted your apartment
on a sensation of cold, I had covered myself with some clothes. But these were insufficient
to secure me from the dews of night. I was poor, helpless, miserable wench. I knew and
could distinguish nothing. But feeling pain invade me on all sides, I sat down and wept.
Soon a gentle light stole over the heavens and gave me a sensation of pleasure. I stared up
and beheld a radiant form rise from among the trees. The moon. I gazed with a kind of wonder.
It moved slowly, but it enlightened my path, and I again went out in search of berries.
I was still cold when under one of the trees I found a huge cloak, with which I covered myself
and sat down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind. I was confused. I felt light
and hunger and thirst and darkness, innumerable sounds rang in my ears, and on all sides various
scents saluted me. The only object that I could distinguish was the bright moon, and I fixed my
eyes on that with pleasure. Several changes of the day and night passed, and the orb of night
had greatly lessened when I began to distinguish my sensations from each other. I gradually saw
plainly the clear stream that supplied me with drink and the trees that shaded me with their
foliage. I was delighted when I first discovered that a pleasant sound, which often saluted my
ears, proceeded from the throats of the little winged animals, who had often interpreted the
light, intercepted the light from my eyes. I also began to observe with greater accuracy the forms
that surrounded me, and to perceive the boundaries of the radiant roof of light which canopied me.
Sometimes I tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds, but was unable. Sometimes I wished
to express my sensations in my own mode, but the uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from
me frightened me into silence again. The moon had disappeared from the night and again with a
lessened form showed itself while I still remained in the forest. My sensations had by this time
become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to
the light and to perceive objects in their right forms. I distinguished the insect from the herb,
and by degrees one herb from another. I found that the sparrow uttered none but the harshest
tones whilst those of the blackbird and thrush were sweet and enticing. One day when I was
cold I found a fire which had been left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with the light
at the warmth I experienced from it. In my joy I thrust my hand into the live embers,
but quickly drew it out again with a cry of pain. How strange, I thought, that the same
cause should produce such opposite effects. I examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy
found it to be composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches, but they were wet
and would not burn. I was pained at this, and sat still watching the operation of the fire.
The wet wood which I had placed near the heat dried in itself become inflamed. I reflected on
this, and by touching the various branches I discovered the cause and busied myself in
collecting a great quantity of wood that I might dry it and have a plentiful supply of fire. When
I came on and brought sleep with it I was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished.
I covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches upon it, and then,
spreading my cloak, I lay on the ground and sank into sleep. It was morning when I awoke,
and my first care was to visit the fire. I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly
fanned it into flame. I observed this also, and contrived the fan of branches which roused the
embers when they were nearly extinguished. When night came again I found with pleasure
that the fire gave light as well as heat, and that the discovery of this element was useful
to me and my food, for I found that some of the ovals that the travelers had left had been
roasted and tasted much more savory than the berries I gathered from the trees. I tried
therefore to dress my food in the same manner, placing it on the live embers. I found the
berries were spoiled by this operation, and the nuts and roots much improved.
Food, however, became scarce, and I often spent the whole day searching in vain for a few acorns
to assuage the pangs of hunger. When I found this, I resolved to quit the place that I had hitherto
inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants I experienced would be more easily satisfied.
In this emigration I exceedingly lamented the loss of fire which I had obtained through accident,
and knew not how to reproduce it. I gave several hours to the serious consideration of this
difficulty, but I was obliged to relinquish all supply, all attempt to supply it, and wrapping
myself in my cloak, I had struck across the wood towards the setting sun. I passed three days in
these rambles, and at length discovered the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place the
night before, and the fields were of one uniform white. The appearance was discolored, and I found
my feet chilled by the cold damp substance that covered the ground. It was about seven in the
morning, and I longed to obtain food and shelter. At length I perceived a small hut on a rising
ground which had doubtlessly been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a new sight
to me, and I examined the structure with great curiosity. Finding the door open, I entered.
An old man sat in it near a fire over which he was preparing his breakfast.
He turned on hearing a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the hut,
ran across the field with the speed of which his debilitated form hardly seemed capable.
His appearance differed from any I had ever before seen, and his flight somewhat surprised me,
but I was enchanted by the appearance of the hut. Here the snow and rain could not penetrate.
The ground was dry, and it presented to me then as exquisite and divine a retreat as pandemonium
appeared to the demons of hell after their sufferings in the lake of fire. I greedily
devoured the remnants of the shepherd's breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese, milk, and wine.
The latter, however, I did not like. Then, overcome by fatigue, I lay down among some straw
and fell asleep. It was noon when I awoke, and allured by the warmth of the sun, which shone
brightly on the white ground, I determined to recommence my travels, and thus depositing the
remains of the peasant breakfast and wallet I found. I proceeded across the fields for several
hours until, at sunset, I arrived at a village. How miraculous did this appear! The huts, the
neater cottages, the stately houses engaged my admiration by turns. The vegetables in the garden,
the milk and cheese that I saw placed at the windows of some of the cottages allured my
appetite. One of the best of these I entered, but I had hardly placed my foot within the door before
children shrieked, and one of the women fainted. The whole village was roused, some fled, some
attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to
the open country and fearfully took refuge in a low hovel, quite bare, and making a wretched
appearance after the palaces I had beheld in the village. This hovel, however, joined a cottage
of neat and pleasant appearance, but after my late dearly bought experience I dared not enter it.
My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so low that I could enter it I could with difficulty
sit upright in it. No wood, however, was placed on the earth which formed the floor, but it was dry,
and although the wind entered it by innumerable chinks, I found it an agreeable asylum from the
snow and rain. Here, then, I retreated and laid down to have, happy to have found a shelter,
however miserable from the inclementcy of the season and still more from the barbarity of man.
As soon as morning dawned I crept from my kennel that I might view the adjacent cottage and
discover if it could remain in the habitation I had found. It was situated against the back of
cottage and surrounded on both sides, on the sides which were exposed by a pigsty and a clear
pool of water. One part was open, and by that I had crept in, but now I covered every crevice by
which I might be perceived with stone and wood, yet in such a manner that I might move on the
occasion to pass out, all the light I enjoyed came through the sty and that was sufficient for me.
Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeting it with clean straw, I retired,
for I saw the figure of a man in the distance, and I remembered too well my treatment the night before
to trust myself in his power. I had first, however, provided for my sustenance for the day
by a loaf of coarse bread which I purloined and a cup from which I drank more conveniently than
my hand of the pure water which flowed by my retreat. The floor was a little raised so that
it was kept perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was tolerably warm.
Thus being provided, I resolved to reside in this hovel until something should occur
which might alter my determination. It was indeed a paradise compared to the bleak forest,
my former residence, and the rain-dropping branches and dank earth. I ate my breakfast
with pleasure and was about to remove a plank to procure myself a little water when I heard a step,
and looking through a small chink I beheld a young creature with a pail on her head passing
before my hovel. The girl was young and of gentle demeanor, unlike what I have since found cottagers
and farm house servants to be. Yet she was meanly dressed, a coarse blue petticoat, and a linen
jacket being her only garb. Her fair hair was plaited but not adorned. She looked patient yet
sad. I had lost sight of her, and in about a quarter of an hour she returned bearing the pail
which was now partially filled with milk. As she walked along, seemingly uncommon by the burden,
a young man met her, whose countenance expressed a deeper despondence. Uttering a few sounds with
an air of melancholy, he took the pail from her head and bore it to the cottage himself.
She followed and they disappeared. Presently I saw the young man again with some tools in his hand
across the field behind the cottage, and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the house,
sometimes in the yard. On examining my dwelling, I found that one of the windows of the cottage
had formerly occupied a part of it, but the panes had been filled up with wood,
and one of these was a small and almost imperceptible chink through which the eye
could just penetrate. Through this crevice a small room was visible, whitewashed and clean,
but very bare of furniture. In one corner, near a small fire, sat an old man, leaning his head on
his hands in a disconsolid attitude. The young girl was occupied in arranging the cottage,
but presently she took something out of a drawer which employed her hands, and she sat beside the
old man, who, taking up an instrument, began to play and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice
of the thrush or the nightingale. It was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch, who had never
beheld aught beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent countenance of the aged cottager
won my reverence, while the gentle manners of the girl enticed my love. He played a sweet,
mournful air which I perceived drew tears from the eyes of his amiable companion,
of which the old man took no notice until she sobbed audibly. Then he pronounced a few sounds,
and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt at his feet. He raised her and smiled with such
kindness and affection that I felt sensations of a particular and overpowering nature.
They were a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as I had never before expressed, experienced,
from either hunger or cold, warmth nor food, and I withdrew from the window, unable to bear these
emotions. Soon after, the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a load of wood.
The girl met him at the door, helped to relieve him of his burden, and, taking some of the fuel
into the cottage, placed it on the fire. Then she and the youth went apart into a nook of the
cottage, and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of cheese. She seemed pleased and went
into the garden for some roots and plants, which she placed in water and then upon the fire.
Afterward, she continued her work, whilst the young man went into the garden and appeared busily
employed in digging and pulling up roots. After he had been employed thus about an hour,
the young woman joined him, and they entered the cottage together.
The old man had in the meantime been pensive, but on the appearance of his companions,
he assumed a more cheerful air, and they sat down to eat. The meal was quickly dispatched.
The young woman was again occupied in arranging the cottage, and the old man walked before the
cottage in the sun for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in
beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old with silver hairs and
accountants beaming with benevolence and love. The younger was slight and graceful in his figure,
and his features were molded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and attitude expressed
utmost sadness and despondency. The old man returned to the cottage, and the youth,
with tools different from those he had used in the morning, directed his steps across the fields.
Night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, I found the cottagers had a means of prolonging
light by the use of tapirs, and was delighted to find that in the setting of the sun did not
put an end to the pleasure I experienced in watching my human neighbors. In the evening,
the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations, which I did not understand,
and the old man again took up the instrument, which produced the divine sounds that enchanted
me in the morning. As soon as he had finished, the youth began not to play, but to utter sounds that
were monotonous, and neither resembling the harmony of the old man's instrument, nor the
songs of the birds, I since found out that he read aloud, but at that time I knew nothing of the
words or letters. The family, after having been thus occupied for a short time,
extinguished their lights and retired, as I conjectured, to rest. End of chapter 11.